README.md, before:

# PyImageLabeling

[![PyPI version](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/PyImageLabeling.svg?color=green)](https://pypi.org/project/PyImageLabeling/)
[![Python 3.12+](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.12+-blue.svg)](https://www.python.org/downloads/)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://github.com/crillab/PyImageLabeling/tree/master?tab=MIT-1-ov-file#)

- **GitHub Repository**: [View codesource](https://github.com/crillab/PyImageLabeling).
- **PyPI**: [Install via pip](https://pypi.org/project/PyImageLabeling/).

PyImageLabeling is a powerful tool with a **user-friendly interface** based on PyQT6 for creating image masks. These **labeled images** are used in the creation of **machine learning models** dedicated to **computer vision tasks**. 

Two types of labeling are available: 
- **Pixel-by-Pixel**: allows to use the pixel-level precision (paintbrush, magic pen, contour filling).
- **Geometric shapes**: allows to use different geometric shapes (polygon, rectangle, ellipse) for labeling (not yet available, under development).

<figure>
  <img src="https://i.postimg.cc/VsxcS6Jg/screenshot1.png" alt="PyImageLabeling Interface" width="800"/>
  <figcaption>Overview of PyImageLabeling in the context of an application related to pancreatic cancer.</figcaption>
</figure>

<br><br>
<figure>
  <img src="https://i.postimg.cc/gJhN1YGc/screenshot2.png" alt="PyImageLabeling Interface" width="800"/>
  <figcaption>Overview of PyImageLabeling with the <a href="https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/faizalkarim/flood-area-segmentation">Flood Area Segmentation</a> dataset.</figcaption>
</figure>

## Installation and Run

Note that you need first Python 3 (version 3.12, or later) to be installed. You can do it, for example, from [Python.org](www.python.org).

### PyPi installation (Windows, Mac and Linux)

Check whether you have the last version of PyPi:

```bash
python3 -m pip install -U pip
```

Install PyImageLabeling: 

```bash
python3 -m pip install -U PyImageLabeling
```

To launch PyImageLabeling:

```bash
python3 -m PyImageLabeling
```

### Executable ".exe" (Windows)

You can download the [Windows executable](https://github.com/crillab/PyImageLabeling/releases/tag/exec). 
Just double-click on the executable file to launch PyImageLabeling.   


### Github Installation (Windows, Mac and Linux)

Here is an illustration for Linux. We assume that Python 3 is installed, and consequently ‘pip3’ is also installed. In a console, type:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/crillab/PyImageLabeling.git
```

You may need to update the environment variable ‘PYTHONPATH’, by typing for example:
```bash
export PYTHONPATH="${PYTHONPATH}:${PWD}/.."
```

Get the last version of pip:
```bash
python3 -m pip install --upgrade pip
```

Executes the pyproject.toml inside the PyImageLabeling directory and installs dependencies ("numpy", "pyqt6", "opencv-python", "pillow", "matplotlib").
```bash
python3 -m pip install -e .
```

To launch PyImageLabeling:

```bash
python3 -m PyImageLabeling
```

## Features

PyImageLabeling considers that you have two working directories (which may be the same): 
- The **working directory** containing your images to be labeled. 
- The **saving directory** containing your labeled images and a JSON file.

The **saving directory** consists of:   
- The **labeled PNG files**: each label of each image is represented by a labeled PNG file.
- The **JSON file** contains several information about labels: identifier, name, color and type.

### Load/Save and Image Management

| **Tool**          | **Functionality**                                                                                      |
|-------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Load**          | Load images and/or labeled images from a **working or saving directory**                               |
| **Save**          | Save current labeled images in a **saving directory**                                                  |
| **Next**          | Select the next image                                                                                  |
| **Previous**      | Select the previous image                                                                              |

### Navigation & Controls

| **Movement**      | **Function**                                                                                           |
|-------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Zoom in**       | Click to zoom in (up mouse wheel shorcut)                                                              |
| **Zoom out**      | Click to zoom out (down mouse wheel shorcut)                                                           |
| **Move**          | Click and drag to move the current (wheel mouse click shorcut)                                         |
| **Reset**         | Reset to default view (zoom and position)                                                              |

### Label setting
| **Tool**          | **Functionality**                                                                                      |
|-------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Add Label**     | Add a new label (by chosing the name, the type and the color of the new label)                         |
| **Label Opacity** | Adjust the transparency of the labeled layers.                                                         |

Moreover, for each label, you can set some parameters: 

| **Tool**          | **Functionality**                                                                                      |
|-------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Color**         | Set the color of the selected label                                                                    |
| **Visibility**    | Set the visibilty of the selected label                                                                |
| **Setting**       | Set the parameters of the selected label                                                               |
| **Remove**        | Remove the selected label (warning: delete all saving files containing this label)                     |

### Labeling Tools

| **Tool**             | **Pixel-by-pixel**                                                                                  |
|----------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Contour Filling**  | Shape detection: click inside a detected shape to fill with the label (tolerance in parameter)      |
| **Paintbrush**       | Paint with the selected label (Paintbrush size in parameter)                                        |
| **Magic Pen**        | Intelligent fill tool based on color similarity (tolerance, pixel limit and method in paramter)     |

| **Tool**             | **Geometric shapes (Not yet available: under development)**                                           |
|----------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Ellipse**          | Precision ellipse selection for label assignment                                                    |
| **Rectangle**        | Precision rectangular selection for label assignment                                                |
| **Polygon**          | Precision polygon selection for label assignment                                                    |

### Editing Tools

Each editing tools is proper to each selected label.

| **Tool**          | **Functionality**                                                                                      |
|-------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Undo**          | Revert the last action with full history support                                                       |
| **Eraser**        | Brush that erases the selected label (Eraser brush size and "all labels" mode in parameter)            |
| **Clear All**     | Clear all label areas.                                                                                 |

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](https://github.com/crillab/PyImageLabeling/tree/master?tab=MIT-1-ov-file#) file for details.

## Use Cases

- **Computer Vision**: Create training datasets for object detection and segmentation
- **Medical Imaging**: Annotate medical scans and diagnostic images
- **Autonomous Vehicles**: Label road scenes and traffic elements
- **Agriculture**: Mark crop areas and plant health indicators
- **Quality Control**: Identify defects and areas of interest in industrial applications

---

Commit message:

Update README with new export functionality and tools

README.md, after:

# PyImageLabeling

[![PyPI version](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/PyImageLabeling.svg?color=green)](https://pypi.org/project/PyImageLabeling/)
[![Python 3.12+](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.12+-blue.svg)](https://www.python.org/downloads/)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://github.com/crillab/PyImageLabeling/tree/master?tab=MIT-1-ov-file#)

- **GitHub Repository**: [View codesource](https://github.com/crillab/PyImageLabeling).
- **PyPI**: [Install via pip](https://pypi.org/project/PyImageLabeling/).

PyImageLabeling is a powerful tool with a **user-friendly interface** based on PyQT6 for creating image masks. These **labeled images** are used in the creation of **machine learning models** dedicated to **computer vision tasks**. 

Two types of labeling are available: 
- **Pixel-by-Pixel**: allows to use the pixel-level precision (paintbrush, magic pen, contour filling).
- **Geometric shapes**: allows to use different geometric shapes (polygon, rectangle, ellipse) for labeling (not yet available, under development).

<figure>
  <img src="https://i.postimg.cc/VsxcS6Jg/screenshot1.png" alt="PyImageLabeling Interface" width="800"/>
  <figcaption>Overview of PyImageLabeling in the context of an application related to pancreatic cancer.</figcaption>
</figure>

<br><br>
<figure>
  <img src="https://i.postimg.cc/gJhN1YGc/screenshot2.png" alt="PyImageLabeling Interface" width="800"/>
  <figcaption>Overview of PyImageLabeling with the <a href="https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/faizalkarim/flood-area-segmentation">Flood Area Segmentation</a> dataset.</figcaption>
</figure>

## Installation and Run

Note that you need first Python 3 (version 3.12, or later) to be installed. You can do it, for example, from [Python.org](www.python.org).

### PyPi installation (Windows, Mac and Linux)

Check whether you have the last version of PyPi:

```bash
python3 -m pip install -U pip
```

Install PyImageLabeling: 

```bash
python3 -m pip install -U PyImageLabeling
```

To launch PyImageLabeling:

```bash
python3 -m PyImageLabeling
```

### Executable ".exe" (Windows)

You can download the [Windows executable](https://github.com/crillab/PyImageLabeling/releases/tag/exec). 
Just double-click on the executable file to launch PyImageLabeling.   


### Github Installation (Windows, Mac and Linux)

Here is an illustration for Linux. We assume that Python 3 is installed, and consequently ‘pip3’ is also installed. In a console, type:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/crillab/PyImageLabeling.git
```

You may need to update the environment variable ‘PYTHONPATH’, by typing for example:
```bash
export PYTHONPATH="${PYTHONPATH}:${PWD}/.."
```

Get the last version of pip:
```bash
python3 -m pip install --upgrade pip
```

Executes the pyproject.toml inside the PyImageLabeling directory and installs dependencies ("numpy", "pyqt6", "opencv-python", "pillow", "matplotlib").
```bash
python3 -m pip install -e .
```

To launch PyImageLabeling:

```bash
python3 -m PyImageLabeling
```

## Features

PyImageLabeling considers that you have two working directories (which may be the same): 
- The **working directory** containing your images to be labeled. 
- The **saving directory** containing your labeled images and a JSON file.

The **saving directory** consists of:   
- The **labeled PNG files**: each label of each image is represented by a labeled PNG file.
- The **JSON file** contains several information about labels: identifier, name, color and type.

### Load/Save and Image Management

| **Tool**          | **Functionality**                                                                                      |
|-------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Load**          | Load images and/or labeled images from a **working or saving directory**                               |
| **Save**          | Save current labeled images in a **saving directory**                                                  |
| **Export copy**   | Create a copy of the saving in another folder                                                          |
| **Next**          | Select the next image                                                                                  |
| **Previous**      | Select the previous image                                                                              |

### Navigation & Controls

| **Movement**      | **Function**                                                                                           |
|-------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Zoom in**       | Click to zoom in (up mouse wheel shorcut)                                                              |
| **Zoom out**      | Click to zoom out (down mouse wheel shorcut)                                                           |
| **Move**          | Click and drag to move the current (wheel mouse click shorcut)                                         |
| **Reset**         | Reset to default view (zoom and position)                                                              |

### Label setting
| **Tool**          | **Functionality**                                                                                      |
|-------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Add Label**     | Add a new label (by chosing the name, the type and the color of the new label)                         |
| **Label Opacity** | Adjust the transparency of the labeled layers.                                                         |

Moreover, for each label, you can set some parameters: 

| **Tool**          | **Functionality**                                                                                      |
|-------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Color**         | Set the color of the selected label                                                                    |
| **Visibility**    | Set the visibilty of the selected label                                                                |
| **Setting**       | Set the parameters of the selected label                                                               |
| **Remove**        | Remove the selected label (warning: delete all saving files containing this label)                     |

### Labeling Tools

| **Tool**             | **Pixel-by-pixel**                                                                                  |
|----------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Contour Filling**  | Shape detection: click inside a detected shape to fill with the label (tolerance in parameter)      |
| **Paintbrush**       | Paint with the selected label (Paintbrush size in parameter)                                        |
| **Magic Pen**        | Intelligent fill tool based on color similarity (tolerance, pixel limit and method in paramter)     |

| **Tool**             | **Geometric shapes**                                                                                |
|----------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Ellipse**          | Precision ellipse selection for label assignment                                                    |
| **Rectangle**        | Precision rectangular selection for label assignment                                                |
| **Polygon**          | Precision polygon selection for label assignment                                                    |

### Editing Tools

Each editing tools is proper to each selected label.

| **Tool**               | **Functionality**                                                                                             |
|------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **change labeled area**| Change the lebel of an area for another one with a click                                                      |
| **Undo**               | Revert the last action with full history support                                                              |
| **Eraser**             | Brush that erases the selected label (Eraser brush size and "all labels" mode in parameter)                   |
| **Clear All**          | Clear all label areas.                                                                                        |

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](https://github.com/crillab/PyImageLabeling/tree/master?tab=MIT-1-ov-file#) file for details.

## Use Cases

- **Computer Vision**: Create training datasets for object detection and segmentation
- **Medical Imaging**: Annotate medical scans and diagnostic images
- **Autonomous Vehicles**: Label road scenes and traffic elements
- **Agriculture**: Mark crop areas and plant health indicators
- **Quality Control**: Identify defects and areas of interest in industrial applications

---
